README.md, before:


# IPv6 / IPv4 address parser in C

    A self-contained embeddable address parsing library.

![IPv6 Parse Diagram](ipv6-parse.png)

Author: jacobrepp@gmail.com
License: MIT

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/jrepp/ipv6-parse.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/jrepp/ipv6-parse)


## Features

- Single header, multi-platform
- Full support for the IPv6 & IPv4 addresses, including CIDR
  - Abbreviations `::1`, `ff::1:2`
  - Embedded IPv4 `ffff::10.11.82.1`
  - CIDR notation `ffff::/80`
  - Port notation `[::1]:1119`
  - IPv4 `10.11.82.1`, `10.11.82.1:5555`, `10.0.0.0/8`
  - Combinations of the above `[ffff::1.2.3.4/128]:1119`
- Single function to parse both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses and ports
- Rich diagnostic information regarding addresses formatting
- Two way functionality address -> parse -> string -> parse
- Careful use of strings and pointers
- Comprehensive tests



## IPv4 Compatibility Mode

See test.c: test_api_use_loopback_const
```c
    127.111.2.1
    uint16_t components[IPV6_NUM_COMPONENTS] = {
        0x7f6f,
        0x0201 }
```

- Addresses can be constructed directly in code and support the full two-way functionality


## Building / Debugging

Full tracing can be enabled by running `cmake -DPARSE_TRACE=1`


### ipv6_flag_t

Flags are used to communicate which fields are filled out in the address structure
after parsing. Address components are assumed.

```c
typedef enum {
    IPV6_FLAG_HAS_PORT      = 0x00000001,   // the address specifies a port setting
    IPV6_FLAG_HAS_MASK      = 0x00000002,   // the address specifies a CIDR mask
    IPV6_FLAG_IPV4_EMBED    = 0x00000004,   // the address has an embedded IPv4 address in the last 32bits
    IPV6_FLAG_IPV4_COMPAT   = 0x00000008,   // the address is IPv4 compatible (1.2.3.4:5555)
} ipv6_flag_t;
```

### ipv6_address_t

Simplified address structure where the components are represented in
machine format, left to right [0..7]

e.g. little-endian x86 machines:

     aa11:bb22:: -> 0xaa11, 0xbb22, 0x0000, ...

```c
#define IPV6_NUM_COMPONENTS 8
#define IPV4_NUM_COMPONENTS 2
#define IPV4_EMBED_INDEX 6
typedef struct {
    uint16_t                components[IPV6_NUM_COMPONENTS];
} ipv6_address_t;
```
*ipv6_address_full_t*

Input / output type for round trip parsing and converting to string.

Features are indicated using flags, see *ipv6_flag_t*.

```c
typedef struct {
    ipv6_address_t          address;        // address components
    uint16_t                port;           // port binding
    uint16_t                pad0;           // first padding
    uint32_t                mask;           // number of mask bits N specified for example in ::1/N
    const char*             iface;          // pointer to place in address string where interface is defined
    uint32_t                iface_len;      // number of bytes in the name of the interface
    uint32_t                flags;          // flags indicating features of address
} ipv6_address_full_t;
```

### ipv6_compare_t

Result of ipv6_compare of two addresses

```c
typedef enum {
    IPV6_COMPARE_OK = 0,
    IPV6_COMPARE_FORMAT_MISMATCH,       // address differ in their
    IPV6_COMPARE_MASK_MISMATCH,         // the CIDR mask does not match
    IPV6_COMPARE_PORT_MISMATCH,         // the port does not match
    IPV6_COMPARE_ADDRESS_MISMATCH,      // address components do not match
} ipv6_compare_result_t;
```

### ipv6_diag_event_t

Event type emitted from diagnostic function

```c
typedef enum {
    IPV6_DIAG_STRING_SIZE_EXCEEDED          = 0,
    IPV6_DIAG_INVALID_INPUT                 = 1,
    IPV6_DIAG_INVALID_INPUT_CHAR            = 2,
    IPV6_DIAG_TRAILING_ZEROES               = 3,
    IPV6_DIAG_V6_BAD_COMPONENT_COUNT        = 4,
    IPV6_DIAG_V4_BAD_COMPONENT_COUNT        = 5,
    IPV6_DIAG_V6_COMPONENT_OUT_OF_RANGE     = 6,
    IPV6_DIAG_V4_COMPONENT_OUT_OF_RANGE     = 7,
    IPV6_DIAG_INVALID_PORT                  = 8,
    IPV6_DIAG_INVALID_CIDR_MASK             = 9,
    IPV6_DIAG_IPV4_REQUIRED_BITS            = 10,
    IPV6_DIAG_IPV4_INCORRECT_POSITION       = 11,
    IPV6_DIAG_INVALID_BRACKETS              = 12,
    IPV6_DIAG_INVALID_ABBREV                = 13,
    IPV6_DIAG_INVALID_DECIMAL_TOKEN         = 14,
    IPV6_DIAG_INVALID_HEX_TOKEN             = 15,
} ipv6_diag_event_t;
```

### ipv6_diag_info_t

Structure that carriers information about the diagnostic message

```c
typedef struct {
    const char* message;    // English ascii debug message
    const char* input;      // Input string that generated the diagnostic
    uint32_t    position;   // Position in input that caused the diagnostic
    uint32_t    pad0;
} ipv6_diag_info_t;
```

### ipv6_diag_func_t

A diagnostic function that receives information from parsing the address

```c
typedef void (*ipv6_diag_func_t) (
    ipv6_diag_event_t event,
    const ipv6_diag_info_t* info,
    void* user_data);
```

### ipv6_from_str

Read an IPv6 address from a string, handles parsing a variety of format
information from the spec. Will also handle IPv4 address passed in without
any embedding information.

```c
bool IPV6_API_DECL(ipv6_from_str) (
    const char* input,
    size_t input_bytes,
    ipv6_address_full_t* out);
```

### ipv6_from_str_diag

Additional functionality parser that receives diagnostics information from parsing the address,
including errors.

```c
bool IPV6_API_DECL(ipv6_from_str_diag) (
    const char* input,
    size_t input_bytes,
    ipv6_address_full_t* out,
    ipv6_diag_func_t func,
    void* user_data);
```

### ipv6_to_str

Convert an IPv6 structure to an ASCII string.

The conversion will flatten zero address components according to the address
formatting specification. For example: ffff:0:0:0:0:0:0:1 -> ffff::1

Requires output_bytes
Returns the size in bytes of the string minus the nul byte.

```c
size_t IPV6_API_DECL(ipv6_to_str) (
    const ipv6_address_full_t* in,
    char* output,
    size_t output_bytes);
```

### ipv6_compare

Compare two addresses, 0 (IPV6_COMPARE_OK) if equal, else ipv6_compare_result_t.

Use IPV6_FLAG_HAS_MASK, IPV6_FLAG_HAS_PORT in ignore_flags to
ignore mask or port in comparisons.

IPv4 embed and IPv4 compatible addresses will be compared as
equal if either IPV6_FLAG_IPV4_EMBED or IPV6_FLAG_IPV4_COMPAT
flags are passed in ignore_flags.

```c
ipv6_compare_result_t IPV6_API_DECL(ipv6_compare) (
    const ipv6_address_full_t* a,
    const ipv6_address_full_t* b,
    uint32_t ignore_flags);
```

Commit message:

Support for shortened IPv4 addresses with ports
1 -> 0.0.0.1
1.2 -> 1.0.0.2
1.2.3 -> 1.2.0.3
1.2:3 -> 1.0.0.2:3

Updated postive and negative tests and documentation

README.md, after:


# IPv6 / IPv4 address parser in C

    A self-contained embeddable address parsing library.

![IPv6 Parse Diagram](ipv6-parse.png)

Author: jacobrepp@gmail.com
License: MIT

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/jrepp/ipv6-parse.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/jrepp/ipv6-parse)


## Features

- Single header, multi-platform
- Full support for the IPv6 & IPv4 addresses, including CIDR
  - Abbreviations `::1`, `ff::1:2`
  - Embedded IPv4 `ffff::10.11.82.1`
  - CIDR notation `ffff::/80`
  - Port notation `[::1]:1119`
  - IPv4 `10.11.82.1`, `10.11.82.1:5555`, `10.0.0.0/8`
  - IPv4 addresses with less than 4 octets (1 -> 0.0.0.1, 1.2 -> 1.0.0.2, 1.2.3 -> 1.2.0.3)
  - Basic IPv4 with port 10.1:8080 -> 10.0.0.1:8080
  - Combinations of the above `[ffff::1.2.3.4/128]:1119`
- Single function to parse both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses and ports
- Rich diagnostic information regarding addresses formatting
- Two way functionality address -> parse -> string -> parse
- Careful use of strings and pointers
- Comprehensive tests



## IPv4 Compatibility Mode

See test.c: test_api_use_loopback_const
```c
    127.111.2.1
    uint16_t components[IPV6_NUM_COMPONENTS] = {
        0x7f6f,
        0x0201 }
```

- Addresses can be constructed directly in code and support the full two-way functionality


## Building / Debugging

Full tracing can be enabled by running `cmake -DPARSE_TRACE=1`


### ipv6_flag_t

Flags are used to communicate which fields are filled out in the address structure
after parsing. Address components are assumed.

```c
typedef enum {
    IPV6_FLAG_HAS_PORT      = 0x00000001,   // the address specifies a port setting
    IPV6_FLAG_HAS_MASK      = 0x00000002,   // the address specifies a CIDR mask
    IPV6_FLAG_IPV4_EMBED    = 0x00000004,   // the address has an embedded IPv4 address in the last 32bits
    IPV6_FLAG_IPV4_COMPAT   = 0x00000008,   // the address is IPv4 compatible (1.2.3.4:5555)
} ipv6_flag_t;
```

### ipv6_address_t

Simplified address structure where the components are represented in
machine format, left to right [0..7]

e.g. little-endian x86 machines:

     aa11:bb22:: -> 0xaa11, 0xbb22, 0x0000, ...

```c
#define IPV6_NUM_COMPONENTS 8
#define IPV4_NUM_COMPONENTS 2
#define IPV4_EMBED_INDEX 6
typedef struct {
    uint16_t                components[IPV6_NUM_COMPONENTS];
} ipv6_address_t;
```
*ipv6_address_full_t*

Input / output type for round trip parsing and converting to string.

Features are indicated using flags, see *ipv6_flag_t*.

```c
typedef struct {
    ipv6_address_t          address;        // address components
    uint16_t                port;           // port binding
    uint16_t                pad0;           // first padding
    uint32_t                mask;           // number of mask bits N specified for example in ::1/N
    const char*             iface;          // pointer to place in address string where interface is defined
    uint32_t                iface_len;      // number of bytes in the name of the interface
    uint32_t                flags;          // flags indicating features of address
} ipv6_address_full_t;
```

### ipv6_compare_t

Result of ipv6_compare of two addresses

```c
typedef enum {
    IPV6_COMPARE_OK = 0,
    IPV6_COMPARE_FORMAT_MISMATCH,       // address differ in their
    IPV6_COMPARE_MASK_MISMATCH,         // the CIDR mask does not match
    IPV6_COMPARE_PORT_MISMATCH,         // the port does not match
    IPV6_COMPARE_ADDRESS_MISMATCH,      // address components do not match
} ipv6_compare_result_t;
```

### ipv6_diag_event_t

Event type emitted from diagnostic function

```c
typedef enum {
    IPV6_DIAG_STRING_SIZE_EXCEEDED          = 0,
    IPV6_DIAG_INVALID_INPUT                 = 1,
    IPV6_DIAG_INVALID_INPUT_CHAR            = 2,
    IPV6_DIAG_TRAILING_ZEROES               = 3,
    IPV6_DIAG_V6_BAD_COMPONENT_COUNT        = 4,
    IPV6_DIAG_V4_BAD_COMPONENT_COUNT        = 5,
    IPV6_DIAG_V6_COMPONENT_OUT_OF_RANGE     = 6,
    IPV6_DIAG_V4_COMPONENT_OUT_OF_RANGE     = 7,
    IPV6_DIAG_INVALID_PORT                  = 8,
    IPV6_DIAG_INVALID_CIDR_MASK             = 9,
    IPV6_DIAG_IPV4_REQUIRED_BITS            = 10,
    IPV6_DIAG_IPV4_INCORRECT_POSITION       = 11,
    IPV6_DIAG_INVALID_BRACKETS              = 12,
    IPV6_DIAG_INVALID_ABBREV                = 13,
    IPV6_DIAG_INVALID_DECIMAL_TOKEN         = 14,
    IPV6_DIAG_INVALID_HEX_TOKEN             = 15,
} ipv6_diag_event_t;
```

### ipv6_diag_info_t

Structure that carriers information about the diagnostic message

```c
typedef struct {
    const char* message;    // English ascii debug message
    const char* input;      // Input string that generated the diagnostic
    uint32_t    position;   // Position in input that caused the diagnostic
    uint32_t    pad0;
} ipv6_diag_info_t;
```

### ipv6_diag_func_t

A diagnostic function that receives information from parsing the address

```c
typedef void (*ipv6_diag_func_t) (
    ipv6_diag_event_t event,
    const ipv6_diag_info_t* info,
    void* user_data);
```

### ipv6_from_str

Read an IPv6 address from a string, handles parsing a variety of format
information from the spec. Will also handle IPv4 address passed in without
any embedding information.

```c
bool IPV6_API_DECL(ipv6_from_str) (
    const char* input,
    size_t input_bytes,
    ipv6_address_full_t* out);
```

### ipv6_from_str_diag

Additional functionality parser that receives diagnostics information from parsing the address,
including errors.

```c
bool IPV6_API_DECL(ipv6_from_str_diag) (
    const char* input,
    size_t input_bytes,
    ipv6_address_full_t* out,
    ipv6_diag_func_t func,
    void* user_data);
```

### ipv6_to_str

Convert an IPv6 structure to an ASCII string.

The conversion will flatten zero address components according to the address
formatting specification. For example: ffff:0:0:0:0:0:0:1 -> ffff::1

Requires output_bytes
Returns the size in bytes of the string minus the nul byte.

```c
size_t IPV6_API_DECL(ipv6_to_str) (
    const ipv6_address_full_t* in,
    char* output,
    size_t output_bytes);
```

### ipv6_compare

Compare two addresses, 0 (IPV6_COMPARE_OK) if equal, else ipv6_compare_result_t.

Use IPV6_FLAG_HAS_MASK, IPV6_FLAG_HAS_PORT in ignore_flags to
ignore mask or port in comparisons.

IPv4 embed and IPv4 compatible addresses will be compared as
equal if either IPV6_FLAG_IPV4_EMBED or IPV6_FLAG_IPV4_COMPAT
flags are passed in ignore_flags.

```c
ipv6_compare_result_t IPV6_API_DECL(ipv6_compare) (
    const ipv6_address_full_t* a,
    const ipv6_address_full_t* b,
    uint32_t ignore_flags);
```
